[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> On December 5th,
1948, in the evening,
not far from
Albuquerque, New Mexico,
an Air Force pilot up in the
air saw an object, a glowing,
greenish object going on a
horizontal trajectory and just
lift up and then level
off and continue flying.
He couldn't tell
what this thing was.
Not long after that, a
commercial airline pilot
saw an orange object moving
in on a horizontal trajectory,
turn green, and then drop off,
seemingly toward the ground.
This began the
mystery of something
known as the "green fireballs."
And it lasted for quite a while.
In New Mexico and the American
Southwest, for several years,
it was the subject
of a very high-level
of scientific and intelligence
community investigation.
And as far as we can tell,
we have no explanation for it
to this day.
In fact, over the
next few months,
up until the spring
of 1949, there
were a total of 39 of
these green fireball
reports that were being made.
And they continued
through the rest of 1949,
into the early 1950s.
Now, let's get a little
bit of context here.
We're in the early
stages of the Cold War.
So naturally, a lot of these
scientists and intelligence
officials were wondering, "Are
the Russians up to something?
Are they probing our country and
our sensitive installations?"
Of course, this is all by
Los Alamos National Labs,
which is where the
United States developed
most of its nuclear technology.
Very sensitive area there.
You don't want random
aircraft or spies
flying over there, obviously.
So the question was
"Was this Russian?"
And there was never any
indication, frankly,
that Soviets, the Russians, were
behind these green fireballs.
Some of the most brilliant
minds of the American national
security establishment
were really
asking long, hard
questions about this.
One of them was Edward Teller.
This is the man who is known
as the father of the hydrogen
bomb.
Teller was of an
extraordinarily high intellect,
one of the most
brilliant scientists
that existed in the
world at that time.
And he was one of
the people that
was attending the meetings to
try to figure this thing out.
Another one was
Dr. Lincoln LaPaz.
And LaPaz was an
astronomer who was
one of the great
pioneers of studying
meteors and meteorites.
LaPaz was in New
Mexico, working there.
He was a longtime consultant
to the United States Air Force.
And LaPaz was
brought in to this.
And LaPaz, in fact, had
a couple of sightings
of these green fireballs
himself, one of which
he had painted by his wife.
She did a nice job in
doing a depiction of this.
The thing is, what
could these have been?
Could they have been meteorites?
Well, it seems no
one really believed
that they were meteorites.
LaPaz absolutely did not.
This is the guy who's the
expert on meteors and meteorites
and he's saying, "No.
It's absolutely not that."
The thing is, these things
were flying way too slow
for any kind of meteorite.
And they were of, typically,
a horizontal trajectory.
And then, they would
often be seen to maneuver.
They would go left.
They would cut right.
They would go up.
They would go down.
Like how is that possible?
And how is it that
they're glowing?
What's the mechanism
by which they're
doing the things that they do?
No one really had
any answer to this.
But there is no
conclusion that we're
aware of that these
were natural phenomena.
So they seem to be artificial.
And again, the question
is, "If they're artificial,
who's making them and how?"
By the later part
of December 1948,
a group was formed called
"The Los Alamos Astrophysics
Association."
All of its members were
scientists, engineers.
They all had
security clearances.
So this wasn't just some
random neighborhood group
of interested citizens.
These were people all
who had association
with Los Alamos National Labs.
They were all people who had
a very, very distinct reason
for wanting to figure out what
these green fireballs were.
And in fact, they issued their
own provisional conclusion
that very month, in which they
said, "These are not meteors.
There's no way.
They're way too
slow to be meteors.
They're flying at a completely
horizontal trajectory
for extended periods of time."
They were wondering "Is someone,
i.e. the Russians, sending
some kind of long-range
objects that's
entering Earth's
atmosphere and leveling out
for whatever purpose?"
Maybe espionage, but how
would you have espionage?
Were they going to attach
a camera to these things?
In 1948, none of that
really seemed feasible.
So again, there was really no
understanding, no explanation
as to what this thing could be.
This situation, really,
quickly escalated
to high levels of concern
among Army Intelligence,
among Air Force
Intelligence, and among a lot
of the scientists
at Los Alamos who
were witnessing this
phenomenon on a nearly
daily basis at times.
One Army memorandum
of January 13th, 1949,
said, well, maybe the
Soviets are engaged
in some kind of mischief.
But they pretty much
discounted that.
And then, they put
the matter this way.
"The United States
may be carrying
on some top secret experiments.
It is felt that these incidents
are of such great importance,
especially as they are
occurring in the vicinity
of sensitive installations,
that a scientific board
be sent to this locality."
So yeah.
Is it likely that
the United States
was, itself, doing some kind
of high-level, top secret
experimentation that
created this phenomenon
of these green fireballs?
It's totally possible.
People wondered
about it at the time.
And you never really know.
Except it has to be said.
We don't have any candidates
all these years later.
It's 70 years now.
And we don't really know what
these things could have been.
So I think it's fair to say,
it's easy to talk about, "Oh,
yeah.
Some kind of top secret
project here, doing this."
But if you don't even
have a clue as to what
that top secret
project was, then I
don't think you
have much of a case.
And that's really what ended up
happening with the explanation
that the United States was
engaged in some kind of very,
very secret testing program.
This whole situation led to the
creation of a top secret FBI
memorandum called "Protection
of Vital Installations,"
from January 31st, 1949.
This is a document that's
been talked about quite a lot,
including by myself
on many occasions.
It's a really important
document, because, in it,
the FBI is tracking this whole
conversation by US Military
Intelligence, all
of these meetings,
and just making the
point to say that,
yes, the Military Intelligence
of the United States
considers the matter
of these flying
saucers, these
fireballs, they're
lumping the whole
thing in together
as top secret, top secret.
By the way, I'll just point out.
When you have the
FBI identifying
UFOs as a top secret matter
within the intelligence
community, that strikes
me as significant,
particularly since most of the
documents that we have received
on UFOs through
Freedom of Information
have not been at the top
secret classification,
they've been of lower
levels of classification.
That tells me there's still a
lot of top secret UFO documents
that have not seen
the light of day.
Maybe they never will.
The key statement of that
particular FBI document
was Army Intelligence
has recently
said that the matter of
unidentified aircraft
or unidentified aerial
phenomena, otherwise known
as flying discs, flying
saucers, and balls of fire
is considered top secret by
intelligence officers of both
the Army and the Air Forces.
Now, I've always thought that's
a really important statement.
I mean, here you've got the FBI.
They're following the discussion
that military intelligence
is having on this
whole phenomenon,
focusing on the green fireballs.
But they're talking about flying
saucers and UFOs in general
and that they considered
this top secret.
There was another big meeting
on the green fireballs
in February of 1949.
And LaPaz was there an
Edward Teller was there.
And everyone had their own
opinions on what this was.
Teller, for his part, thought
"Maybe we're not really
talking about solid objects.
Maybe this is some kind of
electro-optical phenomenon."
Of course, there wasn't
really a clear idea
about what that could be.
Other people did
think that we were
talking about some kind of
man-made missile of some sort.
But again, no one could
nail this thing down at all.
In April, the Air Force Office
of Special Investigation,
that's Air Force Intelligence,
sent its own memo
to Air Force headquarters.
That letter noted a couple
of very interesting things
about these green fireballs.
The common characteristics
of most of the incidents
are, A, green color,
sometimes described
as greenish white, bright green,
yellow-green, or blue-green.
B, horizontal paths, sometimes
with minor variations.
C, speed less than
that of meteor,
but more than any other
type of known aircraft.
D, no sound associated
with observation.
E, no persistent
trail or dust cloud.
F, period of visibility
from 1 to 5 seconds.
What's obvious is that this team
of super brilliant scientists
with highest level
security clearances
could not figure out what
they were dealing with.
So if you had a
top secret project
and guys like LaPaz and Teller
are not being briefed in on it
and they're just being allowed
to run around in circles trying
to figure out what this is,
that's rather interesting
in and of itself.
But essentially,
no one had a clue
of what they were dealing
with, solid objects,
not solid objects, missiles, not
missiles, natural, not natural.
Well, actually, no one
was saying natural.
Everyone was saying
"not natural."
But they didn't really want to
say "not natural," because that
begged the question,
"If they're not natural,
then they must
belong to someone."
Of course, if
they're not natural,
that is if they're
artificial, that
creates a whole other
series of problems
that you've got to identify now.
Who is making these things?
And again, we have no clue as
to who's-- this is a classic--
this is the classic UFO problem,
right here in a nutshell.
You've got a phenomenon that
no one believes is natural.
Everyone, therefore,
believes it's artificial.
And there are no candidates
to ascribe this to.
There's no one out there
that's a realistic candidate
for having made these things.
And on top of that, of course,
the fact that these fireballs,
or whatever they
were, were being
seen in a very sensitive area.
Los Alamos, that is the
spot where the United States
developed its atomic bombs.
It was the headquarters,
the center point
of nuclear technology science.
Particularly, in
1948, 1949, this
was one of the most important
sciences in the world.
The United States
still, at that time,
had a monopoly of atomic bombs.
Now, during 1949, the
Russians did detonate
their first atomic bomb.
But this was a very, very, very
secretive type of technology.
The United States was not
interested in anyone snooping
around over some of the
most sensitive installations
in the world relating to atomic
science and atomic technology,
which is exactly what these
green fireballs were doing.
You really get the sense
from this phenomenon
is that these scientists
who were meeting just
kept coming over the same
territory again and again
and again.
By the later part of
1949, they were actually
using much stronger
language in their reports,
going up the chain of command.
You hear you've
got Representatives
from the Atomic Energy
Commission, from the FBI,
from the US 4th Army, from
Air Force Intelligence,
and from other organizations
that are all converging here
to talk about this to
try to figure this out.
Air Force Office of
Special Investigations,
in October 1949, issued
this confidential memo
that says, "The
continued occurrence
of unexplained
phenomena of this nature
in the vicinity of
sensitive installations
is cause for concern."
There still were a
couple of holdouts
who wondered if this was some
kind of natural phenomena.
But then, you have
to ask yourself,
"If this is a
natural phenomenon,
how come all of
the incidents are
confined to this limited
geographic location that
just happens to be
where America's most
sensitive nuclear technology
is being developed?"
And I'm guessing all of
the meeting attendees were
wondering that very same thing.
Sometime during this
period, late part of 1949,
there appears to have been
a very significant incident
of a UFO or some
kind of object that
involved a key atomic base.
And that phrase, "a
key atomic base,"
was actually used in
an article following
an investigation
about this that was
published a few years later.
What this incident
seems to have involved
is a very high-ranking US Air
Force officer and the tracking
of five metallic-looking
UFOs traveling
at a tremendous speed
over an unknown base,
probably in New Mexico,
tracked at a speed
of over 4,000 miles per hour,
tremendous velocity, very
high altitude.
Radar tracked these at
an altitude of something
like 100,000 feet.
That's very, very high indeed.
We had nothing in the late
1940s that could travel
at that type of an altitude.
The U-2 spy plane,
for example, which
was developed about
a decade later,
could reach a ceiling of
a little over 80,000 feet.
This is 100,000
feet and it's moving
at a speed of about
4,500 miles per hour.
Now, this incident is missing
from the "Project Blue Book"
files, but it was published
in a "Life" magazine article
from 1952.
Kind of amazing.
Now, it's published in a
magazine, you think, "Well,
who cares about that?"
But there's been a
lot of investigation
by individual UFO
researchers and there
doesn't seem to be any
doubt that it's authentic.
As a matter of fact,
there was another incident
in which a UFO in this
region was tracked
at that same altitude, about
100,000 feet, traveling
at a very, very fast speed.
As far as the green
fireballs were concerned,
one thing that we know
that came out of this
was an Air
Force-designed program
called Project
Twinkle, which was
designed, at least in theory, to
set up a triangulation station.
So you'd have tracking cameras
in three different areas,
three different parts of New
Mexico, that would, hopefully,
track this object and then
provide triangulation data,
so that you could have a
really good accurate read
on this thing that was going on.
Now, the problem
with Twinkle, this
was written about by people
like Captain Edward Ruppelt
a couple of years later, Air
Force Captain, "Project Blue
Book."
And he said, "Yeah, the whole
thing was a big failure."
Well, I think I
would beg to differ.
I think Twinkle was, perhaps,
set up so that it would fail.
They put two of the
cameras in places
where there was practically
no activity whatsoever.
Like what are they thinking?
Even so, on one
occasion, they clearly
captured an object traveling
at about 100,000 feet
at multiple thousand
miles per hour
and with a diameter
of roughly 30 feet.
So this is an actual object.
The problem is that that event
was buried within the Project
Twinkle final report.
Their conclusion had
no correspondence
to the data that
was in the report.
The conclusion was
"Yeah, we didn't really
get any hard data to work with
in terms of this phenomenon."
But if you go into the report,
that's absolutely not true.
On one occasion, you have three
theodolite cameras tracking
an object at 100,000
feet, multiple thousand
miles per hour, with a
diameter of 30 feet or so.
So I think that's
kind of interesting.
That's really all that we
have of the green fireball
phenomenon.
This was this thing that arose
at a certain period of time.
It went for a couple of years.
And then, who knows
what happened to it?
It seems to have
just dissipated.
Was it natural phenomenon?
Or was it artificial?
Well, it seems to
have been artificial.
So if it was artificial, was it
a test that the United States
military was undertaking?
Well, if it was a test that
the military was undertaking,
we don't know what it was.
And here we are, two decades
now into the 21st century,
we still don't
know what that was.
So I think that's
a bit of a stretch
to say that this was some
kind of secret project.
What we can say is that
it seemed artificial.
There's no explanation for it.
And we don't really know
who was responsible for it
after all these years.
This is part, however, of
a larger tendency of UFOs,
or UAP, to be seen
in the vicinity
of very sensitive nuclear or
atomic types of installations
or weapons systems.
I'll come back to
that at another time.
But this is definitely
part of a pattern.
I've always felt that the green
fireball phenomenon constitutes
a genuine case of real UFOs.
That is, these are
objects that are not
explainable in any
conventional sense,
doesn't look like we
made them, doesn't look
like anyone else made them.
They seem to be artificial.
So you fill in the
blanks from there.
[MUSIC PLAYING]